
                               GENESIS!

                         By R. R. WINTERBOTHAM

            Renzu was mad, certainly! From Venus' lifeless
             clay he dreamed of moulding a mighty race; a
                  new Creation, with himself as God!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Planet Stories Summer 1941.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The unreal silence of outer space closed in about _The Traveler_. In
front of the huge atom-powered space rocket hung the sun's dazzling
disc and behind the pale, silver face of the earth echoed the light.
Captain Vic Arlen was a god in the heavens; Dave McFerson, the
engineer, was a demi-god. And what was Harry Renzu? It was hard to
call a great scientist a devil.

There was Gheal--neither god nor devil, only a poor, hideous,
half-human slave that had been brought with Renzu to the earth from a
previous expedition to Venus. Captain Arlen quit trying to classify
himself and his passengers. They were neither gods nor devils. Not even
men, taking the group as a whole.

An ominous chill seemed to reach through the beryllium hull of the ship
from outer space, caressing Arlen's backbone. A faint cry sounded in
the passageway that led to the sleeping quarters behind the control
room.

The captain tripped the controls into neutral. The acceleration was
complete and from now until the braking rockets were fired, the craft
would follow its carefully calculated orbit.

Again came the cry, a groan of pain and a moaning sob. The captain
strode into the passage.

"Gheal!" he called, recognizing the Venusian's hoarse voice. "Gheal!
What's the matter?"

A repetition of the cry was the only answer. The passageway was open,
but the sobs seemed to be coming from the cabin of Harry Renzu, the
scientist who had chartered the moon rocket for his second expedition
to Venus.

The captain paused before the cabin door, listening. The cry came again
and he pushed open the door.

The hideous Venusian was on the floor, looking upward with his two
light-sensitive eye-glands at Renzu, who stood over him with an
upraised cane.

Gheal's rubbery, lipless mouth was agape, revealing his long, sharp
teeth. He had raised one of his long, rope-muscled arms to catch the
descending blow. His hairless, leathery body trembled slightly with
pain.

"You dumb, dim-witted chunk of Venusian protoplasm!" Renzu snarled as
he brought the cane crashing over the monster's shoulders. "When I want
a thing done, I want it done!"

Arlen pushed into the room and seized Renzu's arm before the scientist
could strike again.

"Hold on, Renzu!" Arlen commanded, pushing the scientist back and
seizing the cane. "Lay off! Can't you treat this miserable wretch with
decency?"

Renzu's face flushed angrily. His deep-set eyes burned with fury.

"This is none of your affair!" Renzu snapped. "Go back to your business
of running this ship. I didn't hire you to run my business."

"This may be your expedition," Arlen replied stubbornly, "but while
we're in space, I'm the captain of this ship and my orders are to be
obeyed. My orders are to give this Venusian beast humane treatment."

A whimpering sob broke from the throat of the brute on the floor.

Renzu sullenly twisted his arm loose from the captain's grasp. He
appeared more calm now.

"You are right, Arlen," he said. "Your orders are to be obeyed. But you
aren't a scientist. You don't know Gheal. He's not like the animals we
know on the earth. He has to be beaten."

"Not while we're in space. I won't stand for it."

"You can't stand in the way of science, Arlen. I shall whip Gheal, if I
deem it necessary." Renzu ended his words with a suggestive snap of his
fingers in Gheal's direction. The monster cringed into a corner of the
stateroom.

"Come with me, Gheal," Arlen ordered, beckoning to the monster.

The creature, seeming to understand, rose to his feet and followed
Arlen out of the door.

<tb>

The captain took the Venusian forward into the control room, where he
daubed the welts on the creature's naked shoulders with arnica.

McFerson, easy-going, but dependable old spaceman, watched the
operation critically. Gheal winced as the arnica touched his skin. He
squirmed and tried to resist.

"Hold on a minute, Cap," McFerson said. "Look at the right shoulder,
where you put the arnica; it's red and inflamed."

"So it is, but arnica ought to help."

"Look at the left shoulder, where you haven't put any arnica."

"Great guns! It's almost healed!"

"I'd say maybe arnica wasn't the best treatment."

Captain Arlen corked the bottle and put it aside. "Gheal looks like a
man. Sometimes he acts like a man. Yet he's entirely different most of
the time.

"I've been watching him, Cap. I somehow get the idea that Gheal finds
it unhandy, most of the time, to be built like a man."

The captain laughed. He took Gheal's arm and held it up. "Look at that.
Good, human bones, but the body of a monster. I wish you could talk,
Gheal. I wish you could tell us more about yourself. Why are you almost
a man yet the farthest point south?"

Gheal uttered a sort of deep-throated growl.

"Renzu says you can be vicious--that you're a killer at heart. Renzu
said one of your kind killed Jimmy Brooks on the first expedition. You
don't look like a killer. Brooks was a big man. You'd have a hard time
killing him."

Gheal's sight-glands stared from Arlen to McFerson.

Arlen laughed and patted Gheal's hairless head and pointed to a
built-in seat in the corner.

"You're welcome to stay here as long as you don't bother us," he said.

Gheal shuffled uneasily and whimpered, but he did not go to the
seat. Instead, he turned and moved toward the door. The creature
looked ridiculous, clad as he was only in a pair of Renzu's discarded
trousers, which had been rolled at the bottom to fit his stubby legs.

At the door the Venusian hesitated and glanced back at the captain.
Then he slowly turned and shuffled down the passageway.

"Hey you!" Captain Arlen shouted. "Come back here!"

Gheal did not stop. He was striding to Renzu's room. He pushed open the
door.

A fear for Renzu's safety rushed into the captain's mind. He ran after
the creature and entered Renzu's cabin. But as he opened the door he
gasped in astonishment.

Gheal was crawling into a corner of the room, while Renzu stood nearby
laughing.

"You see, Arlen," smiled Renzu, "I'm his master. He recognizes my
authority and no one else's. He would not desert me, no matter how I
treated him."

Renzu picked up the cane that Arlen had tossed on the bunk a few
minutes before. As the scientist shook the stick at Gheal, Arlen
thought he saw a look of satisfaction creep into the creature's face.

"Just the same," Arlen said, "I can't stand your beating him. He may
enjoy it. He may be a masochist at heart, but I won't stand for it."

"Your mind is provincially human, Arlen," said Renzu. "When you look
at Gheal you see the product of an entirely different evolution. You
see a creature without emotions, without ethics. He's devoid of every
terrestrial feeling, especially gratitude. He may even hate you for
taking his side against me."

There was a trace of bitterness in Renzu's voice.

"I wouldn't be too sure, Renzu," Arlen said. "If the laws of physics
apply on Venus, as well as the earth, why couldn't biological and
psychological laws apply there also. Even the lowest of creatures show
understandable reactions on earth. Why not on Venus?"

"Because Gheal has been made differently," Renzu said, with a repulsive
grin.

<tb>

Hour by hour Captain Arlen watched Venus grow in size. The planet
expanded from a glowing crescent to the size of the moon as seen from
the earth; soon it floated large in space, filling half the sky ahead
of the ship, a billowing, fluffy ball of shining clouds. Its surface
was entirely obscured by its misty atmosphere.

Arlen began braking the ship and he called Renzu into the control room
for a conference on where to pierce the cloud blanket.

Renzu, huge and muscular, overdid himself in graciousness as he greeted
Arlen in the control room. The scientist seemed to radiate exaltation
and he strained himself to appear congenial.

The man was excited, Arlen decided, for Arlen himself was thrilled
at the prospect of adventure, of seeing strange sights on a strange
planet. But the reaction was different in Arlen. Where Renzu swelled
and swaggered, Arlen looked dreamily into the clouds ahead.

"I'm bringing the ship around to the sunward side," Arlen said. "It's
best to land about noon--that is the noon point. The planet turns once
in thirty hours and that will give us a little more than seven hours of
daylight to orient ourselves after the landing."

Renzu nodded in agreement. All this had been threshed out before.

"Very well," he said, "but it is best that you pierce the clouds at
about forty-five degrees north latitude. There's ocean there that
nearly circles the planet and there's fewer chances of running into
mountains beneath the clouds. Once we're through the cloud belt, we'll
have no difficulty. The clouds are three or four miles above the
surface and there's plenty of room to maneuver beneath them."

Arlen twisted the valves and the deceleration became uncomfortably
violent. Renzu's first trip had determined the existence of a
breathable atmosphere on the surface of Venus, although the cloud belt
was filled with gases given off by Venusian volcanoes, and many of
these gases were poisonous to man.

In a few minutes the rocket ship stood off just above the cloud belt.
McFerson checked the landing mechanism and made his final report to the
captain. Arlen checked the gravity gauge, which now would be used as an
altimeter during the blind flying in the Venusian clouds.

"Okay!" Captain Arlen called.

"Okay!" echoed McFerson.

_The Traveler_ nosed downward into the rolling clouds. A whistling
whine arose as the craft struck the atoms of the atmosphere. Repulsion
jets set up their thunder and the landing operation began.

The ship settled slowly through the clouds. The mist completely
obscured everything outside the craft and Arlen flew blind, trusting
his meteor detection devices to warn him of mountain peaks, which he
feared despite Renzu's assurance that there were no high ranges at this
latitude.

At last the craft dropped through the wispy canopy to float serenely
over a calm ocean which bulged upward toward them in the solar flood
tide.

To the northwest was a dim coastline. High mountains were faintly
visible against the horizon.

"Perfect!" said Renzu. "That is my continent--our destination. Sail
toward it."

The ship zoomed toward the land at the comparatively slow speed of five
hundred miles an hour. In a few minutes it was decelerating again, with
the continent before them.

The high mountain range clambered up from a narrow plain that skirted
the sea. This plain was sandy, a desert waste, but Renzu indicated it
was the spot for the landing.

Arlen brought _The Traveler_ down gently alongside a broad stream that
emptied into the sea. When the dust of the landing cleared away, he
looked with dumbfounded amazement at the Venusian scene.

As far as his eyes could see were barren rocks and sand: there were
no trees, no grass, no signs of life. The planet was as sterile as an
antiseptic solution. Even seaweed and mosses were missing from the
seashore.

"Maybe you know what you're doing, Renzu," Arlen said, "but it looks to
me as if you've directed us to the edge of a desert."

"'Tain't no small desert, either," chimed McFerson.

"My dear Arlen," Renzu replied, cracking his lips in another of his
irritating smiles, "this is one of the most fertile spots on the entire
planet. You must remember, Venus is much different from the earth."

<tb>

Immediately after the landing all hands, including Renzu, were busy
with the routine duties that the expedition required. Gheal was given
simple tasks, such as unpacking boxes of equipment to be used by the
expedition, but the Venusian seemed to attend to these in a preoccupied
manner. He worked in sort of a daze, frequently whimpering like a
sick dog, and turning his globular eyes from time to time out of the
porthole at the landscape of his native planet.

"He's homesick," McFerson suggested to Arlen. "But look! What's he got
in his hand?"

It was a long white bar of metal. Arlen quickly seized the bar and
examined it. It was pure silver. Gheal had been unpacking a box
crammed with silver bars of assorted lengths and thicknesses, ranging
from the size of small wire up to rods half an inch thick and a foot or
more in length. A fortune in silver had been transported to Venus.

"Well, that's Renzu's business, not mine," Arlen decided.

He returned to his duties. There was much to do: the engines had to be
recharged, preparatory to a quick takeoff, should conditions arise to
make the planet untenable for earthmen.

Tests of the soil revealed utter sterility of all forms of life. It
was baffling. Some sort of bacteria should have been in the soil, even
though the place was only a desert.

Arlen opened the arms chest and issued small but powerful atomic
disintegrators to McFerson, Renzu and himself. He did not give Gheal
one of the weapons, for Gheal did not appear to have the skill
necessary to operate it. His uncanny ignorance was so obvious.

The disintegrators were simple magnetic mechanisms capable of
collapsing atoms of atmosphere and sending the resultant force of
energy in a directed stream toward a target. Fire from disintegrators
could melt large rocks almost instantly and it could destroy any living
creature known to man.

Renzu strapped his weapon at his side and turned to Arlen.

"I'm going outside for a walk with Gheal," he said. "Gheal seems
nervous and uneasy. Perhaps his actions are due to his return to his
native land. A walk might make him happier, in his own peculiar way."

Arlen nodded and went back to the control room to talk to McFerson. He
found the engineer looking out of a porthole.

"Look!" McFerson said, pointing out the porthole.

Trudging along the beach, carrying the case containing the silver rods,
were Renzu and Gheal. The Venusian was walking with difficulty, but as
he faltered, Renzu would kick him unmercifully and force him on.

"The devil!" Captain Arlen said. "He doesn't dare beat Gheal when he
knows I'm watching."

McFerson shook his head.

"Maybe he's right, treating Gheal that way," he said. "After all,
Renzu is a scientist and he knows more about Gheal than we do. Maybe
he's right in saying beating is the only treatment Gheal understands.
Besides, I don't know if I trust Gheal. Since we've landed he's acted
like a tiger in a cage. Gheal's a Venusian and Venusians are supposed
to have murdered Renzu's partner on the first expedition."

"But even the worst creature on earth--except man, perhaps--doesn't
kill without a reason. And even man sometimes has a reason, when
apparently he hasn't."

Darkness descended rapidly on Venus and Renzu did not return. The two
spacemen decided it was unnecessary to stand guard and turned in. Renzu
knew how to operate the space locks from the outside of the ship and
could enter when he returned. Gheal, whose clumsy fingers were too
unwieldly even to operate a disintegrator gun, would not be able to
operate the locks, nor would any creature like him.

It was still dark when Arlen awakened. The long, fifteen-hour Venusian
night was completed and still Renzu had not returned.

The captain awakened McFerson. They ate a light breakfast and did minor
chores on the ship until daylight suddenly lighted the landscape.

"Do you suppose we ought to look for them? Maybe Gheal went haywire.
Maybe something's happened."

Arlen considered. Renzu was armed, while Gheal was not. Renzu claimed
complete mastery over the Venusian, yet something might have happened
to give Gheal the upper hand. Not that Renzu didn't deserve it.

"I'll go outside and look around," Arlen said.

Arlen stepped through the locks. The warm Venusian air was
invigorating. He took a deep breath.

A shuffling sound behind him caused the captain to turn. There,
rounding the end of the ship was a creature, fully naked, staring at
him with gland-like eyes and baring his teeth in a vicious snarl.

"Gheal!" Arlen cried. "Gheal! Where's Renzu?"

The creature did not reply. Instead, it advanced slowly with a
shuffling crouch, stretching his arms menacingly toward Arlen.

<tb>

Arlen's hand went to his disintegrator. The creature resembled Gheal,
but it did not act like Gheal. The captain's eyes swept over the animal
again. No, it wasn't Gheal. There were differences. It was another of
Gheal's race.

Arlen hesitated to kill the creature. If there were a tribe of the
creatures in the vicinity, such an act would arouse enmity. It would
lead to complications that would endanger Renzu, who was away from
the ship. Yet, Arlen could not be sure what reaction would follow a
slaying. Renzu had said that Venusians had no emotions, in the sense
that man has them. But Gheal certainly had been nostalgic on the day
before. That at least was understandable in a human sense.

Arlen leveled his pistol. Suddenly another figure appeared.

A low-voiced whine sounded as the second figure darted forward.

It was the real Gheal. He was still wearing Renzu's trousers.

The first Venusian turned. He hesitated stupidly, undecided whether
to continue his charge toward Arlen, or to meet the foe who came from
behind. Finally, the beast apparently decided that Arlen was the most
tempting.

The animal sprang at the captain.

Arlen held his gun ready to fire, but the Venusian had acted with a
swiftness that belied his clumsy appearance. Before Arlen could fire, a
heavy, rubbery arm crashed down on his skull. A meteor shower seemed to
flash through Arlen's brain, and then darkness closed in about him as
he tumbled to the sandy beach.

Arlen opened his eyes. He had no way of telling how long he had lain
on the ground. On Venus one never sees the sun; daylight appears and
daylight fades, but there is no way of telling the time of day from the
position of the sun overhead.

The captain's head ached as he lifted himself from the ground. He shook
his head to clear away the haze and he stretched his arms to rise. His
fingers struck something leathery and cold.

There at his side lay the Venusian monster who had attacked him. A wave
of nausea swept over him as he saw the lifeless body horribly mutilated
and torn. The sandy soil of the beach was torn with the struggle that
had taken place.

Arlen forgot his aching head at he examined the dead Venusian. His
disintegrator had not slain the Venusian; clearly Gheal had done the
job.

"So Gheal came to my rescue!" Arlen exclaimed. "Renzu must have been
wrong. These Venusians do have gratitude."

His eyes saw something else as they traveled over the body.

Protruding from the body was a silver rod. Gingerly Arlen tried to pull
the rod from the animal's body, but it would not budge. Was it a weapon?

Arlen saw other rods sticking from the animal, covered with blood. All
of them seemed firmly set in the body of the Venusian.

Arlen looked behind him. The locks of the space ship were open. He
moved wearily to the door and stuck his head inside.

"McFerson!" he called.

There was no answer.

Arlen entered the ship. He carried his disintegrator in his hand.
Venusians might have entered the ship ahead of him. Lights were still
burning in the living quarters, but McFerson was gone.

Arlen moved on; he searched each cabin, but there was no sign of
McFerson, until he reached the control room. There furniture had been
overturned, instruments smashed, and a pool of blood lay on the floor.

Gheal had done this. Arlen was sure that no other Venusian could have
entered the ship and crept up on McFerson without arousing suspicion.
McFerson's disintegrator lay on the floor beside the pool of blood,
indicating that McFerson had grown suspicious too late. The gun had not
been discharged.

The first thing Arlen had to do was to protect himself from further
attack. He drew his own gun and closed the outer locks. The next thing
would be to decide what had happened and what to do.

Renzu probably had suffered the same fate as McFerson, Arlen decided.
He was alone, in a strange world, face to face with a race of
mankilling monsters. The only thing in his favor was that one of these
monsters had befriended him. But how long and how far could Arlen trust
this friendship?

There was, however, a chance that McFerson or Renzu still might be
living. He had to know for sure about this before he did anything else.
And the only way to learn was to investigate.

He left the ship, carefully closing the locks and fastening them behind
him. He found many tracks leading away from the ship, along the banks
of the stream that flowed from the mountains.

From among the tracks he picked out Renzu's bootprints. There were
tracks of Gheal going away, coming back, and going away again. He
distinguished the two sets of Gheal's prints leading toward the
mountains by the fact that one set was more deeply imprinted in the
moist sand than the other. Gheal had been carrying McFerson's body.

But what was this? There was another set of tracks coming toward the
space ship. They were not Gheal's prints, for they were three toed.
Gheal had five toes. Gheal and the creature who had attacked Arlen were
different--one had three, the other five toes.

Gheal might not have rescued Arlen out of gratitude after all. A
natural enmity might have existed between the two races of Venusians.
Arlen's rescue might have been an accident.

Arlen studied. There was something else that fitted into the picture.
If he could fit it correctly, he would have the answer. Somehow, now,
he doubted if Gheal had rescued him out of gratitude; yet, he doubted
if the rescue had been purely accidental.

Arlen returned to the space ship and loaded a haversack with food. He
was going into the mountains to get to the bottom of the mystery. He
scribbled a note and left it in the control cabin in case Renzu or
McFerson returned; if either were alive.

<tb>

The captain followed the stream into a deep-walled canyon opening
into the mountains. A short distance from the ship he found Gheal's
discarded trousers, indicating beyond a doubt that the Venusian had
come this way after Arlen had been knocked unconscious in the sand.

A mile or so farther on he saw a print where Gheal had placed McFerson
on the ground. Then, a thrill of gratitude swept over Arlen, another
set of boot prints appeared on the trail. McFerson was not dead. He
was walking.

The daylight was fading and Arlen realized he would not have much more
time to follow the tracks without the aid of his flashlight. The walls
of the gorge were almost perpendicular now and nearly a mile high on
each side of the stream. The river boiled and churned over the barren
rocks, but its movement was the only animation of the scene. Nowhere
were there signs of life, excepting the footprints on the trail.

At last the trail forked upward from the stream, following a narrow
ledge of rock along the canyon wall. The footprints of the slain
Venusian now were wide apart and deeply imprinted in the sand,
indicating that the creature had run rapidly down the path.

"He probably spotted our ship landing and headed toward us right away,"
muttered Arlen. "His presence outside the craft may have been what made
Gheal so uneasy yesterday. Gheal sensed an enemy near at hand." But
this didn't seem to be the answer, either.

Beyond the next curve the canyon walls slid back and the ledge widened
into a gentle slope leading to the top of the canyon. As Arlen climbed
over the rim he found himself on a plateau.

It was dark now, but the place was lighted by a huge campfire not far
away. Huddled around the campfire were four figures. In the still air
of the night, Arlen heard guttural grunts of Venusians and above these
tones he heard the sharp voice of Harry Renzu issuing commands to these
alien beasts.

Arlen crept forward and concealed himself behind a rock. There were
three Venusians. He saw something else, too. McFerson, his head swathed
in bandages, was sitting in the shadow of a huge square stone.

Arlen watched. He could not hear Renzu's words and he moved forward to
obtain a better view, when his hand sank into a sticky mass of slime.

"Ugh!" he grunted in disgust, lifting his hand.

It was covered with a thick, viscous jelly. It was sticky and as he
turned his flashlight on the stuff he saw that it was colorless and
translucent. It was not a plant or an animal. It did not move, it was
cold, and had no structure, nor roots.

Shielding his light so that it could not be seen from the campfire,
Arlen examined the ground around him. There were other small pools of
the stuff in the hollows of rocks and in thick masses on the ground.

The captain examined the material more closely. It looked strangely
familiar, and some of the text-book science he had learned in
college came back to him. He remembered examining stuff like this
once under a microscope. It was not petroleum, but something vastly
different--something that was synonymous with life.

It was protoplasm!

<tb>

Vic Arlen gasped.

"Protoplasm! Inanimate protoplasm!"

He forgot he had been nauseated by the slime a moment before and began
to examine the stuff closely. Of course, it was protoplasm, it couldn't
be anything else. Vic Arlen had studied it. He knew. Nothing could hold
water granules in suspension in exactly the same way; nothing had the
same baffling construction.

But there was a question: scientists admitted life could not exist
without protoplasm, but could protoplasm exist without life?

In living protoplasm, death alters the structure. But other processes
than life could, conceivably, preserve the stability of the substance.
This would explain the existence of inanimate protoplasm on Venus.

And why didn't inanimate protoplasm exist on the earth? Arlen thought
for a moment and had the answer for that too. Animal life lives on
protoplasm, as well as being protoplasm itself. Animate protoplasm
can reproduce its kind, but the inanimate kind can neither fight back
nor replace its losses. The inanimate protoplasm on the earth had
disappeared with the appearance of the first animal life. The coming of
the first microbes had caused it to "decay."

If protoplasm existed on the face of Venus it meant there were no
bacteria, no germs of any sort--_no life!_

How could Arlen explain Gheal without evolution from the simple to the
complex? Was evolution working differently on Venus? Again Arlen had
run up a blind alley.

The campfire cast a flickering red glow against the clouds. In spots
above the skies were tinted with other glows from the craters of
Venusian volcanoes. It was not absolutely dark, but it was far from
being as light as a moonlit night on the earth.

Arlen crept closer to the scene. He could see the Venusians plainly
now. Two of them had three toes, while one had five. The five-toed one
was Gheal.

Renzu stood before them, grasping his cane. He would make sharp
commands and the Venusians would rise. If they disobeyed, he would
strike them with the cane. They would shriek with pain. At last these
maneuvers ceased and Renzu turned to McFerson.

"They have to be taught everything," he said. "They have no reflex
actions, no emotions, no instinct--nothing that the lowest creatures on
earth may have. Yet they have everything that makes those things in the
creatures of the earth."

McFerson did not reply. He was watching with staring eyes; eyes filled
with horror.

Renzu reached behind a rock. He drew what appeared to be a human
skeleton from the shadow. As Arlen looked a second time, he saw that
it was not a human skeleton, but an imitation built of the silver rods
and wires that Renzu had transported to Venus. The truth was dawning on
Arlen, but it was unnecessary now, for Renzu was explaining.

"I have created life, McFerson. I have moulded a human likeness out of
protoplasm and fitted it over bones of silver. An electrical device I
have made starts the biological processes going and the protoplasm,
working with chemical exactitude, reforms itself into glands, organs,
muscles and nerves. The product is a beast, inferior to man but
superior to the highest animal on earth, except that he is totally
devoid of such things as reflexes, instincts, emotions and other
survival psychological processes."

As he spoke, Renzu was moulding some of the protoplasm over the
framework of bones. Arlen understood now why the silver rods had
protruded from the Venusian he had found on the beach. Those pieces of
silver had been the creature's bones.

"I made four of the creatures on my previous expedition. Brooks helped
me construct three of them, including the creature that attacked
and killed Arlen on the beach. I made Gheal myself. Gheal was a
masterpiece. He was almost, but not quite human. That is why I took him
to earth with me."

"You're inhuman, Renzu!" McFerson managed to say. "You're less human
than Gheal!"

"Gheal was more human than you think, McFerson. Brooks, you know, was
killed by one of his creations. The same monster that killed Arlen
accounted for him. Yet that monster, in some ways, was above average.
At least he had the beginnings of an instinct. He wanted to kill. After
Brooks was killed, I used his bones for Gheal's skeleton."

Arlen stared in speechless horror and amazement.

"And that isn't all. I'm going to use Arlen's bones for a creature
more human than Gheal. Perhaps, McFerson, your bones may be used for
something greater still. I will make other men, and women, from silver
wire and protoplasm, and create a race of Venusians that will bring
life to this planet. Think of a planet that has evolution beginning
with man and ending with something greater than man has ever dreamed.
And I, McFerson, will be the god of this race!"

McFerson tried to rise, but Gheal rose with a low throated growl, and
the spaceman sank back on the ground.

<tb>

Renzu had finished moulding the protoplasm over the silver bones. With
the help of one of the Venusians he lifted the still form into the air
and placed it carefully inside the stone behind McFerson.

The stone had been hollowed to form a rock sarcophagus.

Arlen saw in the firelight that electric wires ran from a small battery
beside the box.

Renzu touched the switch.

There was a flash of blinding light and sparks flew over the box. Then
Renzu turned off the current and opened the sarcophagus. He worked
rapidly with his hands and then stepped back, holding his cane before
him.

From the box emerged another Venusian. A replica of Gheal's three-toed
companions.

For a moment the creature stood motionless, staring from the sight
glands at his surroundings. Renzu struck the monster sharply with his
cane. The brute moved. Again Renzu struck and the creature moved. At
last it seemed to understand, after Renzu struck it repeatedly. The
beast got out of the box.

Renzu belabored his creation unmercifully with the cane, each movement
had to be directed.

"They have to be taught everything," Renzu said. "They understand
nothing but pain. I have to beat instincts and reflexes into their dumb
brains, for they have no inherited ones."

That also explained why Renzu was a complete master over Gheal. The
Venusian depended on Renzu for everything.

So interested was Arlen watching Renzu train the newly made Venusian,
that the captain did not hear the scrape of a leathery hide on the
rocks behind him. He was unaware of the danger until a ropy cord of
some vile, repulsive tentacle seized him, pulled him off his feet to
the ground and dragged him toward the camp fire.

The rays of the firelight revealed Arlen's captor: a serpent as large
as a python which held him in the crushing folds of its body as it
moved deliberately toward Renzu.

Renzu was amazed at the sight of Arlen.

"I thought you were dead!" he gasped.

"No," Arlen said. "Your creation didn't quite succeed in killing me."

Renzu smiled. "But I see that you did bring your fine bones to me after
all!" He struck the serpent sharply with his cane and the monster
released his grip on Arlen. "The animal that caught you, captain, was
one of our first experiments. It was by charging a string of protoplasm
with electricity, that we discovered that we could make it live. The
result was the pseudo-python, who makes a good watchdog, if nothing
else. It's entirely harmless, since it feeds entirely on inanimate
protoplasm. Unfortunately for Brooks, it was this creature that caught
him and held him while No. 3--the Venusian--killed him."

"It was deliberate murder," said Arlen.

"Perhaps terrestrial law would define it as murder," Renzu said. "But
here on Venus there is no law. It was a scientific experiment."

"And you will murder McFerson and me?"

"I need your skeletons. They will be a fine heritage for future races
of Venusians. Think how you and McFerson will be glorified in Venusian
mythology."

Renzu's eyes were glowing in the firelight with madness. Arlen looked
at the hideous Venusians, seated nearby, watching idiotically. It was
diabolical!

"Now comes an important decision. Shall I use you, or McFerson, first?"

<tb>

McFerson closed his eyes.

"The man's insane, Cap!"

Arlen looked about him. The python was nearby, coiled neatly beside a
rock, ready to spring if he tried to escape.

One of the Venusians rose and threw some shale on the fire. It was
crude petroleum shale. An idea came to Arlen. If he could put out the
fire, he might be able to escape in the darkness.

Then Arlen remembered. His disintegrator was still in his pocket.
Renzu, interested in his experiment, had forgotten to search him,
believing perhaps that Arlen had been disarmed in the attack on the
beach.

Arlen was tempted to use the weapon now, and to blast Renzu and his
hideous tribe of monsters out of existence. But to kill a man without
giving him a chance was not Arlen's way of doing things. The Venusians,
too, now had a right to live. Had they attacked, Arlen would not have
hesitated to kill, but Arlen realized that the only vicious Venusian
was dead. Perhaps Renzu himself had taught that single Venusian how to
kill.

"McFerson," spoke Arlen, "are you all right? Did Gheal hurt you?"

"He bloodied my nose and knocked me out," McFerson said. "He didn't
mean to harm me. Gheal really is gentle as a kitten."

"I think I will use your bones first, Arlen," said Renzu. "You may sit
down beside McFerson. I may as well warn you that there is no chance of
escape. The python guards the only way back and my Venusians enjoy the
creation of another of their kind. They won't let a chance to see it be
spoiled."

Renzu began filling some woven baskets with the inanimate protoplasm as
Arlen sat down beside his companion.

"Could you run for it, if I knocked out the campfire?" Arlen asked.

"I can run, but how will you knock out the fire?"

Vic Arlen acted quickly. His hand brought the disintegrator out of
his pocket and he fired straight into the center of the campfire. The
atomic blast instantly consumed the inflammable material in the fire
and the plateau was dark.

"Run!" Arlen cried. "And look out for the python."

Arlen sprang forward. He heard a leathery scrape ahead of him. It was
the serpent. He dodged back. Suddenly from behind came a hoarse cry.

Arlen turned, ready to blast the Venusian that had shouted. But the
Venusian did not attack. Instead, it darted forward, and with a flying
leap it sprang upon the python. A roar came from the Venusian's throat.

It was Gheal. Arlen would have recognized the voice anywhere.

The faint glow from the volcanoes showed him the edge of the plateau.

Renzu was screaming behind him and he heard the pad-pad of the running
feet of the three remaining Venusians. But Arlen was clear and McFerson
was running beside him.

Arlen took his flashlight from his pocket and used it to follow the
narrow ledge down the mountain into the canyon. Behind the two men,
sounds of pursuit grew fainter.

"We're safe," Arlen said, slackening his pace. "Renzu won't follow us
as long as he knows we're armed."

"He's armed, too," McFerson said.

"He wants our bones too badly to use a disintegrator on us," Arlen
laughed.

The two men traveled on. The Venusian dawn came swiftly.

"You see, Mac," Arlen went on, "we're not human beings to Renzu,
but part of an experiment. Science has overshadowed Renzu's sense
of values. Perhaps he murdered Jimmy Brooks; we know he would have
murdered us to perfect an experiment. Renzu was creating life, and he
would kill to do it. He wanted to be the god of a world that started
with a complex organism instead of a simple microbe."

"The only trouble is that the life lacked instincts that it took
terrestrial animals millions of years to acquire," McFerson added.

"That's what creation may be, Mac," said Arlen. "We did more in a few
minutes than Renzu did with all his scientific knowledge. Gheal learned
the meaning of gratitude. I treated him kindly, and he repaid me by
helping us escape."

They reached the ship. The sea was boiling over the sands. Here and
there, along the water's edge as the dawn broke over Venus, they
saw globose formations of inanimate Venusian protoplasm, seemingly
awaiting the spark that would turn them into living organisms.

Venus was in an azoic age, but life was beginning to appear. It was
life created by a human god, who also was a human devil, a monster.
Future generations of Venusians might worship Harry Renzu, unknowing
that it was the lowly Gheal that brought the first worthwhile instinct
to their race.

Somewhere, far behind in the canyon, were four hideous monsters and a
beast that resembled a serpent. This stampede of protoplasmic creation
was led by its mad god, driven onward by the lust of this insane
demiurge for the bones of his fellow deities.

"Okay!" said Arlen, priming the rockets.

"Okay!" shouted McFerson.

_The Traveler_ was ready to rocket home.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Genesis!, by R.R. Winterbotham

